[GENTLE MUSIC]
[SOFT MUSIC]
[HEART THUMPING]
>>EDWARD GROUP: As we
are all aware by now,
hormone-sensitive cancers are
occurring at epidemic rates.
For example, one in seven women
are affected by breast cancer
and one in three men are
affected by prostate cancer.
While there are numerous reasons
for the development of cancer,
something you might
not be aware of--
and the research is clear--
is that iodine deficiency is
a major piece of the cancer
puzzle.
Iodine deficiency
has been associated
with other hormone-sensitive
cancers, including
thyroid, ovarian, uterine, even
fibrocystic breast disease.
Perhaps the reason we have
made so little progress
in our treatment
of these cancers
is that the underlying
cause has been overlooked.
In this episode of our special
four part series with Dr. David
Brownstein, we will
learn that iodide,
which is effective
and inexpensive,
could be the key to help
solve a global health crisis.
Welcome, Dr. Brownstein.
>>DAVID BROWNSTEIN:
Thank you for having me.
>>EDWARD: So iodine
has been shown
to help out with different
types of cancers.
Can you explain?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Iodine
is an essential element
we can't live without.
It's concentrated in
the glandular tissue.
Every cell in the body needs
and requires iodine to survive.
But it's concentrated
in the glandular tissue
against a gradient, which means
it's an ATP dependent process.
We utilize energy, and
it's so important we
have to use our own energy
sources to move iodine
into the glands.
So a problem develops
when the glands
don't have enough iodine.
Now the glands, as you
mentioned in the intro,
include the thyroid,
the ovaries, the uterus,
the breasts, the prostate,
and the pancreas.
Now we are suffering an
epidemic of glandular problem
in our country.
You mentioned some of it--
the one in seven women
with breast cancer, the one
and three men with
prostate cancer.
But think about it.
We're suffering with
epidemic increases
of pancreatic, ovarian,
uterine cancer.
Thyroid cancer is the
fastest growing cancer
in the United States.
When iodine concentrates
in the glandular tissue,
one of its main
jobs is to maintain
the normal architecture
of the glands.
So if we call this the amount
of iodine the glands need
to maintain their
normal architecture,
an iodine deficiency, it sets in
motion problems for the glands.
The first thing that
happens is you get
cysts growing in the glands.
If it goes out longer, those
cysts become hard and nodular.
If it goes on longer, they
take a hyperplastic appearance
under a microscope, which is
a precancerous appearance.
And the end stage is
cancer of those tissues.
Now this has been
shown in animal,
test tube, and human studies.
And in animal, test
tube, and human studies,
iodine has been shown
to stop this progression
and actually reverse
it at any stage.
So my research has clearly
shown that iodine deficiency
is one of the major causes
of problems in these glands.
>>EDWARD: What about
other types of cancers?
Have you noticed the iodine
deficiency associated
with non-glandular tissue?
>>BROWNSTEIN: The
research has, again, shown
iodine deficiency associated
with other cancers,
from leukemia and lymphoma
cancers and some brain cancers.
It's not clear if iodine's
the cause of that.
But it's definitely
associated with that.
>>EDWARD: Yeah, I would
think that it would probably
be associated with everything
in some way, shape,
or form because iodine's needed
for every cell in the body,
right?
>>BROWNSTEIN: That's correct.
Every cell in the body
needs and requires iodine.
>>EDWARD: Does iodine work
as an antioxidant as well?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Iodine one of
the most potent antioxidants
we know of, and it needs
to be in adequate amounts
in the human body.
>>EDWARD: When we
talk about glandular,
we talk about hormones.
What is the relationship
between iodine and estrogens?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So you can't
produce a hormone in the body
without iodine in those glands.
So that not only
includes thyroid hormone,
which everyone seems
to be aware of,
but that includes
estrogen and progesterone
and testosterone and
DHA and pregnenolone
and the rest of the
hormones in the body.
So if we don't
have enough iodine,
the hormonal milieu
gets disrupted.
And one of the first
things I started
to do at the beginning
of my holistic practice
was to treat people for
hormonal imbalances.
I was using bioidentical natural
hormones and particularly
thyroid hormone for
a lot of patients.
Once I learned
about iodine, I was
able to lower the
amounts of hormones
I needed to help patients
achieve their perfect balance.
>>EDWARD: In women
with glandular cancers,
are you seeing high
estrogen levels usually?
And how does that relate
to the increase in soy
and phytoestrogens and
pesticides and insecticides?
How are those disrupting
the hormones in women?
>>BROWNSTEIN:
Well, I don't think
women are producing estrogen
to give themselves cancer.
So I think that there's
synthetic estrogens called
xenoestrogens in the
environment that's
driving this high
estrogen rate in women.
And these xenoestrogens
are found in the animals
that we're eating because they
put it in the food source.
They're chemicals
that mimic estrogens
in pesticides and insecticides.
They're common chemicals
we put on our lawns,
and they're in plastics.
And the structure
of those chemicals
mimic the estrogen molecule.
So when they get in our body,
which they unfortunately
get in our body
pretty easily, they
can bind to the estrogen
receptor and stimulate it.
And unlike natural hormones
that bind to our receptors
and do their deeds and
then release very quickly,
these xenoestrogens
get stuck there,
and they continually stimulate.
These things that we're seeing
with this are younger girls
are having their period
at an earlier age.
Younger girls are developing
much faster and much larger
than their mothers.
Each generation of women are
getting bigger breast size
than the previous generation.
And I think it's from
these xenoestrogens
in the environment.
So what iodine's role
in this is iodine
can help the body
detoxify from estrogen
and can help increase the
metabolism of estrogen
in the body.
>>EDWARD: So Dr.
Brownstein, thyroid cancer
is the number one
fastest growing cancer
in the United States.
Breast cancer is
also rapidly rising.
Is there a relationship
between the two?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Absolutely
there's a relationship.
Now I saw this relationship
in the first 10
years of my practice before
I learned about iodine.
And it came out in
two studies that
compared women who take thyroid
medication versus women who
don't take thyroid medication
and their chances of getting
breast cancer.
What both studies found
was that the longer
that the women took thyroid
medication, the risk of breast
cancer increased.
Particularly if women took
thyroid medication for 10 years
or more, the risk of breast
cancer nearly doubled.
Now when I saw those
studies first come out,
I couldn't make sense of them.
I know a hypothyroid
state predisposes one
to getting cancer.
So why would taking thyroid
medication predispose one
to getting cancer?
You're treating the problem.
I would think cancer
rates should go down,
and certainly it
shouldn't go up.
I went through the studies
with a fine-tooth comb.
I thought they were well done.
And I couldn't figure it out.
Once I learned about iodine,
it came to me very easily
that the reason women who
take thyroid medication
have an increased
risk of breast cancer
after 10 years is they increase
their metabolic rate when
they take thyroid hormone.
One of thyroid hormone's
main jobs in the body
is to stimulate the cells
to produce more heat
and to produce more energy, and
their metabolic rate goes up.
That's why women who don't
have enough thyroid hormone
gain weight--
and men.
They can gain weight,
and they become heavy.
So taking thyroid
hormone can help people
maintain an optimal weight.
Well, if you take thyroid
hormone for 10 years
and you're deficient
in iodine, you
make that iodine
deficiency problem worse.
Once the metabolic rate goes
up, your need for iodine
goes up with it.
So they're basically
exacerbating an iron deficiency
problem that should have been
addressed at the beginning
because perhaps
2/3 of those women
didn't need thyroid
hormone at all.
They just needed iodine.
Probably one third needed both.
But either way, it's
important, if you're
going to go on thyroid hormone,
to have your iodine levels
assessed at the same time
and either go on iodine first
or concurrently go on
iodine and thyroid together.
Now if you've already
been on thyroid hormone,
you don't have to worry
and get upset over it.
But it's really important to
get your iodine levels checked
and to start that therapy.
What I found in my practice the
first 10 years of just doing
thyroid hormone
without iodine was
that I had 3/4 of my patients
on small amounts of thyroid
hormone.
After adding iodine
to the regimen,
I now have one third of my
patients on thyroid hormone.
And those that are
on thyroid hormone
I've been able to reduce
their dose in about half
of what they were beforehand.
>>EDWARD: And you were the
pioneer in that, right?
There wasn't any scientific
data you could go to
and say, this is what
needs to be done, right?
You pretty much took that task
on yourself to research this.
And through a lot
of trial and error
or let's say working
with a lot of patients,
you've kind of figured this
out on your own, right?
>>BROWNSTEIN: It was
very bothersome to me
why when we just
get older, we need
thyroid hormone to feel good.
I never thought that was right.
I tried various
things, and nothing
worked until I really got
the right form of iodine
going with them.
So it was just a
good observation.
And just, I was unsettled
with doing things the way
I was doing it.
>>EDWARD: So basically,
word of advice
is if you have
thyroid condition,
doctors shouldn't
really treat the thyroid
with thyroid hormone without
evaluating iodine deficiency as
well.
>>BROWNSTEIN: That's right.
And sometimes you
need them both.
And many times you
just need iodine,
and the thyroid
will rectify itself.
>>EDWARD: So why does
this lead to cancer?
What's the relationship
between the iodine, the thyroid
hormones?
What's the initiator
that causes the cancer?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
there's two things here.
So the first thing that
we just went through
was when you go on thyroid
hormone, your metabolic rate
increases.
That naturally increases
your need for more iodine.
If you're already
deficient, you're
going to be more
deficient in iodine.
And that goes back to
my previous description
of iodine's needed for
the normal architecture
of the glands.
If iodine's deficient,
you get cysts.
If it goes on longer, cysts
become hard and nodular.
Hyperplasia's the precursor
to cancer in those tissues.
And so taking thyroid hormone
can exacerbate and accelerate
this continuum.
>>EDWARD: So basically
at the cellular level,
you start having
abnormal cell function.
>>BROWNSTEIN: Absolutely.
>>EDWARD: So speaking about
iodine and thyroid cancer,
we have the pleasure of
speaking with a patient of Dr.
Brownstein's who
lived a nightmare when
diagnosed with thyroid cancer.
However, her fate changed
when she learned about iodine
and met Dr. David Brownstein.
Joining us on
Skype is Stephanie.
Welcome, Stephanie, to
the "Healing Matrix."
>>STEPHANIE: Hello.
I'm glad to be with you.
>>EDWARD: When did
you first learn
that your thyroid was abnormal?
>>STEPHANIE: I actually learned
about it in March of 1999.
I just went for my annual
checkup with my doctor,
and he did a lymphatic check
and said, oh, your thyroid's
kind of swollen.
But that was the last
that he mentioned it,
and I didn't know what a
thyroid gland was at that point.
So I just ignored
it and went on.
And then about two weeks later,
I found out I was pregnant.
So nothing really happened
until after the baby was born.
And then I saw another doctor
who did a lymphatic check
as part of his examination,
and he found a nodule
on my thyroid.
And I told him that I had
a follow-up appointment
for my postpartum six weeks
with my OB/GYN the next week,
and I decided to just
have him check it out.
So he did find it as well, and
he ordered an ultrasound, which
came back as a complex cyst.
Then he ordered a
nuclear med scan,
and then that was inconclusive.
So then he sent me to an
ear, nose, and throat doctor
who did a fine
needle aspiration,
and that result came back as
an abnormal follicular cells.
And he said, let's just
take out half your thyroid
to just be sure.
Now I didn't know that a thyroid
gland was important to my body
and that without
it, I wouldn't live.
I would have probably sought a
second opinion at that point.
But just having had
a baby, being tired
and not really knowing
what all this was,
I just trusted my doctor.
And so I just followed
his advice at that point.
We scheduled the
surgery then for--
it was March of 2000 then.
>>EDWARD: What was
going on in your mind
emotionally during this time?
I mean, was there
any fear involved?
I mean, was there--
you said that you didn't
really understand what
the thyroid was at this time.
But at the same time,
you're pregnant.
I mean, are you, like, worried
or scared about any of this?
>>STEPHANIE: Oh
my goodness, yes.
Having a brand new baby really
changes your perspective
on life.
But actually, at this point,
I didn't know I had cancer.
It was just abnormal
cells, and they just
thought it would
be good to just get
rid of that half of my
thyroid just to be sure.
And so I wouldn't find out
that I had cancer until a month
later when I went for my
stitches to be removed.
>>EDWARD: So you go in to
get your stitches removed.
And how was that
presented to you?
How did they actually diagnose
you with thyroid cancer?
>>STEPHANIE: Sure.
So he kept telling me it's
probably nothing, probably
nothing.
He didn't even look at
the pathology report
before I came in.
And so he took out
my stitches, and he
said, let me go grab
that, comes back
into the office or the
room that I was in.
He falls back against the wall.
I remember it as clear as day.
And he says to me, I'm sorry.
And I was like, you're sorry?
He said, it was
papillary thyroid cancer,
and it's spread to
your lymph nodes.
I just sat there stunned.
I didn't know what to say
because I was just supposed
to have my stitches out.
I looked down at my
four-month-old baby
on the floor and thought, what
in the world just happened?
And he's like, no response?
And I'm thinking,
um, you just told
I have cancer after telling
me it was probably nothing.
What am I supposed to say?
>>EDWARD: What happens next?
>>STEPHANIE: We
scheduled another--
or actually, I had to
go see a radiologist
because that was what he
determined was the best thing
to do.
And he told us
that I had to have
the rest of my thyroid
taken out before I could
go through radioactive iodine.
Part of that preparation was
to go off all your thyroid
medication so that your
body's totally starved.
And I went through
that treatment,
and it wasn't too bad.
I mean, it felt like a bad flu.
And then after I got done
with being in isolation--
because, of course, you have
to be in isolation for 10 days
and that that meant I had to
be away from my baby for that
long too because he was at risk.
They now send you home.
They used to keep you in
the hospital and isolate you
and Geiger counter you when it
was safe for you to go home.
And now they just send you home.
>>EDWARD: How many
times were you treated
with radioactive iodine?
>>STEPHANIE: A total of three
over the next five years.
So my first one was
100 millicuries.
My second was 150 millicuries.
That one got done.
I thought we were finished.
My markers came down.
Everything looked great.
Again, I had to be
away from my son.
He told me for 30 days.
And I asked him
how I was supposed
to care for my son being
away from him for 30 days.
And I kid you not,
he said, put him
in a highchair in the corner
and throw some food at him,
and he'll be fine.
I left that office crying.
I called his office manager,
and I said, what's up with that?
And she said, oh, honey,
that's just the way he is.
You're going to have to
learn to deal with it.
I said, no way.
So I fired him and found
another endocrinologist.
Keep in mind, where I
live, there are only three
in my whole town.
So I was going through
them fast here.
This doctor was really nice.
He was willing to work with me.
I was doing great.
I had my second child.
Everything was going great.
That was in 2002.
And then I started working
with a local chiropractor
and naturopath who was
doing cleanses with me
and nutritional hormone
balancing, things like that.
My liver was actually
bulging out of my rib cage
when I went to see him.
And I was feeling really good.
And I went back, and we ran
labs at my endrocrinologist.
And he said, uh-oh.
He said, your cancer's
back because your markers
are back up.
You're going to have to go
through radioactive iodine
again.
Now this is April of 2005.
And I said, are you sure?
Because at this point,
I knew enough to know
that my TSH had
increased a little bit,
and that would
stimulate thyroglobulin,
which is the marker they use.
He said, no, no, it's cancer.
You have to go back for
another round of radiation.
So once again, I let him do it.
I scheduled an appointment for
the radiation in May of 2005.
And I got 250 millicuries, which
put me at the end of my 500
millicurie maximum for life.
>>EDWARD: What were
some of the symptoms
that you were going through
after some of those treatments?
I mean, I'm just
thinking about all
of the stress of having the
baby, having all of this stuff
going on in your life.
Can you explain to somebody
what that felt like?
>>STEPHANIE: One of the
things that I really
struggled with was anxiety.
And I'd never had
anxiety before.
And I remember shortly
after my son was born,
my girlfriend called me up,
and I just burst into tears.
And she came over right
away to be there with me.
But this happened a lot.
And then I became that manic
mom that just could not
handle any kind of noise.
And now I know that it
was my adrenals that
were just tanking on me.
And so I think that
was the most troubling.
And I did mention it to
my OB/GYN, and, of course,
he offered Zoloft, which
I didn't want any part of.
And I just kept
telling him, I said,
I wasn't like this before
you took away my thyroid.
It has to be related.
They're like, no,
it's not related.
And my endocrinologist
would say,
I don't deal in female hormones.
And my OB/GYN would
say, you're fine
according to the labs
because you're in the range.
And I played this game for five
years, going back and forth
and back and forth
to all the doctors.
And I was like, exactly who
is going to help me now?
And I remember
this doctor's name
that I had heard literally
five years earlier,
and it was Dr. Brownstein.
And so I gave a call to his
office the following week
and scheduled an appointment.
Now this was January,
keep in mind.
And they didn't get me
scheduled until August.
So I was kind of freaking
out at this point.
>>EDWARD: It's so glad that you
did your own research on that.
You found Dr. Brownstein.
Did you know
anything about iodine
before you met Dr. Brownstein?
>>STEPHANIE: All I
knew about iodine was
what I had been told because
I have a shellfish allergy.
And so I was told that
because I have this allergy,
I should never consume iodide.
Coincidentally, my
first endocrinologist,
he did the urinary
iodine test before I
had my radioactive iodine.
And he said, you had the
lowest level of iodine
I have ever seen in
my whole practice.
And I was-- he's been in
practice for like 30 years.
And at that time, I thought,
wow, I really did well.
I followed the diet really well.
But now looking back, I'm like
no wonder I was in crisis.
Enter Dr. Brownstein, who
was 180-degree difference.
>>EDWARD: Going
to Dr. Brownstein.
Dr. Brownstein, when
Stephanie first came in,
what was the first
thing you did for her?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Number
one, I listened to her.
I heard her story, and I was--
I remember commenting
to her about iodine.
Why aren't you on iodine?
And Stephanie told me
about her shellfish allergy
and what the other
doctors said about it.
And I did make a comment to
Stephanie at that first visit.
Do you remember what
I told you, Stephanie?
>>STEPHANIE: Yeah.
Yeah, he actually said
to me, don't worry,
we'll get you well.
And he was the first
doctor that ever
talked about wellness with me.
>>EDWARD: That's
huge when you look
at the vibrational
frequencies of the body
and how the healing
process takes place.
So I assume you tested
her for iodine right away.
What were the results of that?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Oh, she was
incredibly deficient in iodine.
And I really thought
iodine could help her out,
and I thought that might
have been the underlying
cause of all her troubles.
And I knew that papillary
thyroid cancer usually
doesn't kill people her age, and
it responds pretty well iodine
therapy.
I've treated lots
of people with it.
>>EDWARD: So what happened
within the first week,
the first two weeks,
the first month
of having Stephanie
on your program?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So Stephanie,
why don't you tell him that?
>>STEPHANIE: So we
did a lot of things
when I first went to see him.
So it gets a little bit
difficult to separate out
what did what.
But he did put me on 50
milligrams of iodine,
which I kind of freaked
out at, thinking,
oh, no, this is a lot.
But I had to trust him.
Because at this point, I was
kind of at the end of my line.
And so we did desiccated
thyroid and iodine
because I had been on Synthroid.
And I tell you, it was like a
light bulb went on in my brain.
And the joint pain that
I had that I was just
told to live with just
started to melt away.
My energy went up.
It was amazing.
It was like I started
to feel like my old self
again just in a few weeks.
And so I was like, why don't
other people know about this?
Why don't doctors practice
medicine like this?
And it was really
frustrating looking back
on the five years
I had really lost.
>>EDWARD: How much
would you say you
improved after the first
year of working with Dr. B?
>>STEPHANIE: It didn't
even take that long.
I would say by the first
six to seven months,
I estimated maybe
75% to 80% better.
I'd never been able to
do anything with my kids.
By this point, they were
three and five years old.
And so by that summer, we were
able to go to the Detroit Zoo
and walk the whole zoo.
And I was just totally
amazed because that
would have laid me out flat
for a few days after that.
>>EDWARD: How are
you feeling now?
You are cancer free, right?
>>STEPHANIE: I am since 2009.
It actually took three years,
which is important for people
to understand.
I think they're looking
for a quick fix.
And allopathic medicine kind
of promises that through drugs.
And really, it's just a blanket
that's getting thrown over it,
and you've not gotten
to the root cause.
But we did a lot of work.
I did a lot of nutritional
hormonal balancing.
I had my amalgams removed.
I had a root canal
tooth removed.
I did chelation.
I've done multiple detoxes.
So it's not just one thing.
Iodine was a huge part of it.
But definitely, it was great
that he knew holistically
how to treat me and how to
get my body back in balance.
I was shocked by the
number of labs he ran.
But I was relieved
at the same time.
Because when I went to
visit these other doctors,
they ran a TSH, a T4, and a
thyroglobulin, and that was it.
They would deem me sick or
well based on those three labs.
And I knew better.
>>EDWARD: Yeah, the average
time spent with most physicians
is less than seven minutes.
And a doctor truly is a teacher,
not a prescriber, and a coach.
Dr. B, is this--
how many other patients are like
Stephanie that you've treated?
>>BROWNSTEIN: I've treated
many patients like this.
And when I told Stephanie
I thought she'd be well,
I wasn't just trying
to give her false hope.
I really thought she'd
get better with this,
and I thought they were
missing the underlying
cause of the problem.
But many patients like this,
she's an example of my practice
and who me and my partner see.
>>EDWARD: Well
Stephanie, thank you
so much for coming on
and sharing your story.
We wish you a long,
healthy, and happy life.
>>STEPHANIE: Thank you.
I'm at 20 years this year.
So I'm glad.
>>EDWARD: Congratulations.
Congratulations.
>>BROWNSTEIN: Thanks, Stephanie.
>>STEPHANIE: Thanks.
>>EDWARD: Dr. Bernstein,
should radioactive
iodine be used as a last
resort with somebody suffering
from thyroid cancer?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Only as the very
last, last, last, last resort.
After 25 years of
treating patients,
I've never recommended anyone
for radioactive iodine.
And there's better
ways to treat this
than using radioactive
iodine, and that's
with a holistic
treatment regimen.
>>EDWARD: Great.
I do want to point out that
your treatment approach is
a holistic approach.
You pay a lot of attention
to the patient's environment,
the patient's dietary
factors, supplementation.
So it's not only iodine.
It's a full holistic
approach, custom designed
for each patient, right?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Every patient's a
unique biochemical individual.
And they all need
different things.
They need what they need.
So iodine's a great
treatment, but it
should be best used as part of
a holistic treatment regimen
to get the best results.
>>EDWARD: You've touched on
breast cancer a little bit.
What is the link between breast
cancer, iodine deficiency,
and diabetes?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Iodine
concentrates in the breast
just like it does
in the thyroid.
The same mechanism of
concentrating iodine
in the thyroid has been shown
to occur in the breast tissue.
So deficiencies in
iodine in the breast
results in problems with
disrupted architecture, cysts,
nodules, hyperplasia,
and cancer.
And also, keep in mind
that iodine deficiency
causes hypertrophy of
these glandular tissues.
They get bigger.
So they can get a
goiter in their neck.
That's also a problem, too.
So with diabetes, the
situation is exacerbated
because there's not enough
iodine in the pancreas to cause
the pancreas to make insulin.
They become diabetic, and
it creates a whole oxidative
problem in the body and
just worsens any condition
that we're dealing with.
>>EDWARD: Do you
think the incidents
of breast cancer in
the last two decades,
why it's rising so
rapidly, is not only
because of iodine deficiency
but because of all
these other chemicals
and toxins that we're
exposed to on a regular basis?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So if we look at
this question like a big pie,
what percentage-- what
slice of the pie is iodine,
iodine's a large
slice of the pie,
but it's not the whole pie.
There's toxins.
There's nutrient deficiencies.
There's a whole bunch
of things going on here.
So the more things you can do,
the more holistic treatments
you can do--
detoxification, correct
nutrient imbalances,
balance the other hormones, get
rid of fillings in the mouth,
like Stephanie talked about--
all that stuff helps
and should be done.
>>EDWARD: So you
mentioned multiple times
fibrocystic breast disease.
>>BROWNSTEIN: The
reason I keep mentioning
it is because it's
so common out there.
It's estimated that over
80% of women in the US
have fibrocystic breast disease.
Fibrocystic breast disease
is that first signal
that iodine levels are off.
Whenever I see a woman with
fibrocystic breast disease,
I tell her, you have
iodine efficiency, period.
And very rarely does iodine fail
me at improving or resolving
the fibrocystic
breast disease, just
as we talked about with Mary
Ann in the earlier show.
>>EDWARD: So what is the
role of bromide, bromine,
fluoride in breast cancer?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So
just as iodine gets
absorbed into breast tissue,
if iodine is deficient,
bromide and fluoride
can take its place.
Bromide and fluoride are
non-essential elements
that are toxic to the body.
We know that they can
promote carcinogenic effects.
And it's the same struggle
with the thyroid, same struggle
with the ovaries and the uterus.
So we need iodine to
competitively inhibit out
those things from the
breasts, from the ovaries,
from the thyroid, from the
uterus, from the prostate.
It's the same mechanism.
Keep in mind, I said earlier
that our iodine requirements
are higher than
our predecessors.
They're higher than
our parents at our age.
our grandparents.
They're higher than
our great grandparents.
So we need more iodine
in our toxic world
we live in than they did.
>>EDWARD: And we haven't
talked too much about men
during this show.
But you mentioned the prostate.
The toxic halides-- bromide,
fluoride-- is that also toxic
to all glandular tissue?
And what have you
noticed in men?
Have you been treating men?
Have you been seeing
more of an epidemic
with prostate conditions?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So
I've been seeing
more and more men
with prostate cancer
and more and more younger
men with prostate cancer.
When I was getting out of
my training 25 years ago,
you didn't see young men
with prostate cancer.
You're seeing old men
Now you're seeing
young men with it.
So yes, it's becoming a bigger
problem and a younger problem.
And it's the same issue.
The prostate can get cysts,
nodules, hyperplasia, cancer.
And iodine should be part
of everyone's regimen
right now to buffer
that continuum.
>>EDWARD: Have you
had individual males
with, let's say, benign
prostatic hypertrophy, which
you would say
would be an earlier
stage like fibrocystic
breast disease in women
to leading to prostate cancer?
Have you seen good results with
your holistic treatment plan
and putting them on iodine?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Yes.
And I've seen men with
early stage prostate cancer
be able to slow down
their rate of PSA rise
and really stabilize things
with this holistic treatment
regimen.
That includes decent
amounts of iodine.
>>EDWARD: You mentioned
xenoestrogens earlier,
and I know this
affects women and men.
Can you expand on xenoestrogens
and give individuals out
there maybe some tips of
where they're coming from
and how to avoid them?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So
xenoestrogens are
estrogen mimics in
the environment.
They have a chemical structure
similar to estrogens.
So they can bind to
the estrogen receptor.
Because they're different,
they're foreign substances,
our body doesn't know
how to clear them.
Normally, estrogen
binds to the receptor
in a short period of time.
After it produces a protein,
it releases from the receptor.
The xenoestrogens get
stuck on the receptor
and constantly stimulate.
That's why we're getting
this abnormal growth
in these tissues.
So one of the ways you
can avoid xenoestrogens
is eat organic food.
If you're going to
eat animal products,
eat animals that haven't been
fed synthetic hormones that act
like xenoestrogens in the body.
Try not eat food in plastics
and heat food in plastics.
Plastics can absorb
into hot food
and stimulate
estrogen receptors.
Don't put plastics
in the microwave.
Don't put Saran Wrap
Don't put Saran
Wrap over hot food.
Stuff like that can help.
It's not easy.
But we can make a difference.
But it's another
reason why people
need to detox and need to
clean things out and keep
the liver clean.
One of the liver's main jobs
is to act like an oil filter
and keep the blood clean.
When that oil filter of
the liver gets plugged,
the blood starts getting messy.
The hormones get messy.
The liver needs to be
detoxed periodically
in our toxic world.
>>EDWARD: You say toxic
world, and we're basically
spraying toxic chemicals on
all of our foods these days.
You have atrazine,
glyphosate, perchlorate.
You have pesticides,
insecticides
on practically everything these
days, including organic foods.
How does that affect
glandular tissue?
And how does that affect
an iodine deficiency?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
most of the pesticides
contain bromide and fluoride
as part of their makeup,
their chemical makeup.
So that's going to affect the
glandular tissue right there.
We have to detox.
We have to take
care of ourselves.
We have to try and eat organic
foods to avoid this stuff.
>>EDWARD: Autoimmune diseases.
I know you've
talked about this--
Graves' disease, but not
only Graves' disease,
just autoimmune
diseases in general.
I mean, to me, it's like a label
they put on anything that they
don't know what's going on.
It's just an autoimmune disease.
Can you tell us about some of
your more recent research, some
of the things that
you found dealing
with autoimmune diseases,
whether it's linked
to iodine deficiency or not?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So
autoimmune disease
is occurring at epidemic
rates right now.
Conventional medicine does
not have an answer for that.
They use toxic
drugs that basically
block the immune system
from functioning.
And therefore, when
you see the ads on TV,
all the ads are you're at risk
of serious infection like TB
and and terrible
infections coming back
that we took care of years ago.
So I don't think it's
natural for people
to get autoimmune diseases.
You shouldn't be
producing antibodies that
are attacking your own cells.
Something is wrong
with our own cells
that the body is sensing and
is trying to get rid of them.
But just attacking
the immune system
isn't the right style for this.
We need to go to the
underlying cause of that.
Now iodine's part of
that because iodine
is needed by every
cell in the body,
and it's needed for normal
structure and function
of the cell.
So iodine, detoxification,
drinking water,
getting your vitamins
and minerals rebalanced,
getting your hormonal system
balanced, all that stuff helps.
And if you have an
autoimmune disease,
I would say it's best to work
with a holistic doctor who's
familiar with this stuff.
>>EDWARD: So can you
explain to people
what exactly is Graves'
disease and how did it
get that name Graves' disease?
>>BROWNSTEIN: So Graves' disease
is an autoimmune condition
of the thyroid where there's
an inflammatory problem
with the thyroid
going on, and there's
a lot of thyroid
hormone being produced.
These are the people that are
nervous, jittery, palpitations.
They have the bulging eyes
out of their eye sockets.
They're losing weight
when they're not
trying to lose weight.
Graves' disease makes
people miserable.
Now I was taught
in medical school
there's no real known
reason for Graves' disease.
But it was mentioned that
maybe iodine caused it.
But nobody's taking
iodine out there,
and Graves' disease
was going up, up and up
and up every year.
So what we found is that if
iodine levels have fallen
across the United States
over the last 40 to 50 years,
autoimmune thyroid
conditions have
increased at epidemic rates.
Graves' and Hashimoto's
have gone up.
Keep in mind that's a
negative correlation.
Graves' and Hashimoto's
were going up and thyroid
levels going down.
For those that say that iodine
causes Graves' and Hashimoto's
disease, that is disproved
by that simple fact.
>>EDWARD: So what is the
difference between Hashimoto's
and Graves' disease?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well,
they're different illnesses
that are diagnosed with a
sample of the thyroid tissue.
But Hashimoto's disease
is when the lymphocytes,
certain white blood cells,
attack the thyroid and cause
inflammation.
And my feeling is it's
the same underlying
cause as iodine
deficiency coupled
with the other toxicities
that we're having.
>>EDWARD: So how
different are the symptoms
of Hashimoto's versus Graves'?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Hashimoto's can
cause a hyperthyroid symptom
as well, such as nervous,
jittery, and palpitations.
And it can also cause
hypothyroidism symptoms,
such as fatigue, weight
gain, and hair loss.
So that can go either way.
Graves' primarily just does
that fast palpitations,
nervous, jittery symptoms.
>>EDWARD: With your
experience, let's say
somebody is experiencing
cold hands and feet.
They're feeling
fatigued, weight gain.
They go to their
general practitioner.
How does a general
practitioner diagnose them
with Graves' or Hashimoto's
or thyroid disease?
And are they doing
it the right way,
or are they doing
it the wrong way?
>>BROWNSTEIN: I was
trained in medical school
back in the day to
just draw a TSH test.
If that TSH each
test was normal,
you told them it
wasn't your thyroid,
and you sent them away.
Generally, you're
going to give them
another prescription
and an antidepressant
or something like that.
But now they're checking
TSH and T4 levels.
If those are normal,
they're telling the patients
the same thing.
It's not your thyroid.
It's something else,
and probably giving them
an antidepressant out the door.
So there are many more thyroid
tests that should be checked.
And if you're going to
do a thorough analysis
of the thyroid, I
believe you need
to check TSH levels, free
T4s, free T3s, reverse T3,
and thyroid antibodies.
And that's a more comprehensive
way to diagnose a problem.
Conventional doctors generally
will miss Hashimoto's diagnoses
because they don't
do the full testing.
And Hashimoto's is
increasing at epidemic rates.
Because in my practice,
we all check it this way,
and we see it.
>>EDWARD: Talking about
Hashimoto's, I mean,
the huge controversial issue
out there is if you have
Hashimoto's, you
cannot take iodine.
What do you say about that?
>>BROWNSTEIN: Well, I've heard
that from conventional doctors.
I've heard that from
holistic doctors.
I've had bombs thrown at me
on the internet from that.
And what I say to those people
is, as Ricky said to Lucy,
'splain this.
'Splain how as iodine levels
have fallen 50-plus percent
over the last 40 years,
Hashimoto's has gone up
at epidemic rates.
They don't correlate
with one another.
Therefore, iodine does
not cause Hashimoto's.
Now you could say
iodine deficiency causes
Hashimoto's like I do because
that would explain those two
graphs that are going in
a different direction.
>>EDWARD: So you actually use
iodine to treat Hashimoto's.
>>BROWNSTEIN: So Hashimoto's--
I write about this in my book,
and I lecture to
doctors about this.
And it's one of the
hardest topics for doctors
to get their hands around.
But it's the only thing
that could explain
this declining iodine level
and rising Hashimoto's
level over the last 50 years.
Now you can't get Hashimoto's
or Graves' disease
without some iodine.
The thyroid need some
iodine to do anything.
Otherwise, it would
just collapse,
and you would have
nothing with it.
But I show a
mechanism in my book,
and I teach doctors
very distinctly,
and it takes a couple of hours
to go through step by step
the mechanism of
how low iodine sets
the stage for autoimmune
problems in the thyroid.
>>EDWARD: By the way,
you mentioned your book.
This is a fantastic book
that Dr. Brownstein wrote.
And it's called "Iodine--
Why You Need It, Why You
Can't Live Without It."
And that is so true.
This is a fantastic
book, and it's
written in a way that's
very easy to understand.
And it goes over
all the symptoms.
It goes over the
benefits of iodine.
I highly recommend
that you get this book.
It's in its fifth
edition, actually.
And Dr. Bernstein
always updates his books
with all of the latest and
greatest research that's
out there.
Dr. Brownstein, how can
people get in touch with you?
How can they learn
more about what you do?
Where can they go to absorb
more of this information?
>>BROWNSTEIN: They can
find me my website,
www.drbrownstein.com.
We're in West
Bloomfield, Michigan.
And I would encourage
your viewers
not to settle for subpar health.
If they're not feeling
well, sometimes you
have to take matters
in your own hand.
But a holistic treatment
regimen can help a lot of people
out there.
>>EDWARD: Well, thanks for
being on "Healing Matrix," Dr.
Brownstein.
>>BROWNSTEIN: Thank
you for having me.
>>EDWARD: Hopefully the
information presented today
will be part of the paradigm
shift in alternative cancer
treatment.
In our next episode
with Dr. Brownstein,
we will discuss the benefits
of unrefined salt, ozone
treatment, and key vitamins
within Dr. Brownstein's
holistic treatment plan.
I'm Dr. Ed Group, and thank
you for watching this episode
of "Healing Matrix."
[GENTLE MUSIC]
[HEART THUMPING]